March 2021
Technology, Media & Telecommunications Practice
Hardware’s business-
model shift: Finding a 
new path forward 
New business models present an opportunity for IT-infrastructure 
providers, who are facing a migration in value as buyers demand 
cloud-like, customer-centric experiences. 
by Himanshu Agarwal, Chandra Gnanasambandam, Mitra Mahdavian, and Srinath Nagarajan
© Hal Bergman/Getty Images
IT-infrastructure providers face an unenviable 
challenge. Technological change has led their 
customers to view hardware appliances as commod­
itized. At the same time, cloud-based vendors 
and hyperscalers have set new norms for simplifying 
customers’ experiences of purchasing IT infra­
structure. As a result, savvy chief information officers 
(CIOs) and IT buyers now demand a cloud-like 
experience even when buying on-premises IT infra­
structure, such as pay-per-use models for on-site 
equipment to help them manage the complexity of 
their hybrid deployments and IT needs. 
Take the case of networking. Advancements in 
software-defined networking (SDN) help centralize 
the network’s intelligence and control to the 
software layer, resulting in the standardization of the 
underlying hardware. The opportunity for OEMs 
to compete on hardware-feature innovation has all 
but dried up as a result. Intense competition 
from new software-led competitors and cheaper 
substitutes coming onto the market further 
accentuate this challenge. 
Given these forces, IT-infrastructure OEMs have 
little choice but to reinvent their business models 
to increase the share of recurring revenue 
from subscription, software, and services. Yet 
many OEMs struggle with their business-model-
transformation strategy and its execution. 
A successful transition requires four key elements, 
starting first and foremost with selecting a new 
business model that works best for that particular 
company. After that critical decision is made, the 
process involves reinventing core business 
functions, managing the economic risks of such 
a major shift, and embracing a flexible and 
agile new organization and operating model.
The rewards of a business-model 
transformation
IT-infrastructure providers typically adopt a combi­
nation of different approaches to reinventing their 
business model. When done right, IT-infrastructure 
providers can see an increase in market share 
and improvements in customer experience. For 
example, Hewlett Packard Enterprise (HPE) 
says its Greenlake 3.0 solution—a bundle of 
traditional computing and storage hardware with 
software products and services that is priced 
using a single “unit of consumption” such as terabytes 
or number of virtual machines—has onboarded 
more than 1,000 customers with over $4 billion 
in total contract value within three years of its 
launch. In 2019, it also said that the consumer-
satisfaction rating for the Greenlake 3.0 solution is 
more than 80 percent, which is in the 99th percentile 
for IT-service delivery. 
Furthermore, we believe that investors will reward 
new business models with a higher enterprise value 
if providers can consistently demonstrate that 
revenue is recurring in a manner that’s disconnected 
from the life cycle of the hardware and that’s 
subject to low customer churn while sustaining or 
expanding profit margins. Drawing a parallel, 
software companies that underwent successful 
business-model transitions from perpetual 
software-license models to software as a service 
(SaaS) or SaaS-like recurring-revenue models 
were rewarded with higher enterprise valuations. 
The most well-known example is Adobe’s switch 
to subscriptions, which is widely cited as evidence of 
what is possible with the model: the multimedia- 
and creativity-software provider increased its share 
of subscription revenue from 10 percent to 
88 percent between 2010 and 2018.1 During the 
same period, its price-to-sales multiple increased 
from 4.1 to 12.2.2
1	Adobe SEC filings, US Securities and Exchange Commission, sec.gov.
2	Trailing 12-month price-to-sales ratio as of December 31, 2010, and December 31, 2018 (Source: Thomson Reuters, reuters.com).
2
Hardware’s business-model shift: Finding a new path forward
Finding the right model and approach
In our research, we have observed four principal 
ways that IT-infrastructure providers can transform 
their business model. They involve redesigning 
offerings, for example, to separate the use of 
software from the underlying hardware appliance it 
runs on, or to allow the software to operate across 
cloud or hybrid setups, or to provide for subscription 
options (Exhibit 1). 
Each model comes with its own set of considerations, 
so selecting the right model involves fully under­
standing how it would play out for a particular OEM 
and the type of products it sells. 
Software-led product restructuring 
Recognizing the migration of value from hardware 
to software, some IT-infrastructure providers have 
restructured their products and offerings to 
separate the use of embedded software from the 
hardware to offer it on a stand-alone basis. For 
example, in 2017 Nutanix, a leading provider 
of hyperconverged-infrastructure (HCI) technology,3 
began to shift its focus from sale of hardware 
appliances with integrated software to the sale of 
HCI software (Acropolis, sold in software-only 
form) to be run on hardware appliances from any 
IT-infrastructure provider. Since then, it has seen its 
high-margin stand-alone-software-based billing 
grow in share to about 90 percent of its bookings (a 
large share of the company’s increased software 
bookings is also from stand-alone-software add-
ons and cloud products). The company reported 
its overall gross margins increased to 82 percent in 
2020, compared with 66 percent in 2016.4
However, embracing a software-led product 
restructuring presents a risk of loss in market share 
to other hardware-appliance vendors. For example, 
most IT-infrastructure vendors that run Nutanix HCI 
Software-led product 
or oﬀer restructuring
Products and oﬀers 
redesigned to separate 
use and deployment of 
software from underlying 
hardware appliance
Public-cloud and 
hybrid-cloud extensions
Products and oﬀers 
redesigned to operate 
across cloud as 
well as hybrid-cloud 
environments 
Software-adjacent 
portfolio expansion
Product suite 
expands to include 
software add-ons to 
complement core 
hardware appliances
Cloud-like subscription-
pricing models
Pricing models allow customers 
to pay for technical outcomes 
(eg, input/output operations per 
second or latency) on recurring-
payment models such as pay 
per use or subscription
Reinvented business model
Exhibit 1
Four paths have emerged for IT-infrastructure original-equipment 
manufacturers to reinvent their business models.
3	A hyperconverged infrastructure is a turnkey data-center hardware that combines server, storage, and networking into a single appliance 
prebundled with server and storage virtualization software.
4	Nutanix investor presentations for fourth quarter 2020 and first quarter 2018.
3
Hardware’s business-model shift: Finding a new path forward
software also offer their own competing HCI offer­
ings. To manage these risks, hardware companies 
need to avoid the trap of offering embedded 
software on its own without added features or 
functionality. Customers rarely perceive such offers 
as sufficiently differentiated and independent 
from the underlying hardware. Such moves done 
poorly could prove counterproductive since 
customers often view them as mere payment-
model changes. 
In our experience, companies that successfully 
restructure their solutions to be software-led follow 
three steps. First, they disaggregate the hardware 
appliance down to its granular features and 
performance attributes (throughput, input/output 
operations per second, and latency, for example) 
and match them to their users’ performance needs. 
Second, they create a wholly new solution entirely 
of software, operable on any hardware appliance 
featuring an integrated control center to manage 
hardware-performance attributes and adjust 
underlying hardware or virtual resources as needed. 
Finally, they offer several value-added software 
features (performance monitoring and administration, 
advanced analytics on usage, and proactive 
maintenance of underlying hardware, for example). 
Only with these changes do customers view 
the software form-factor product as a viable stand-
alone offer independent from the underlying 
hardware appliance. 
Public-cloud and hybrid-cloud extension 
Today, IT buyers manage their workloads seamlessly 
across multiple deployment models, including 
on-premises data centers and private-cloud, public-
cloud, and remote environments. Many IT 
infrastructure OEMs have embraced the change 
by extending their product and offers to cloud 
and hybrid-cloud deployment models. For example, 
NetApp is a leading provider of on-premises file-
based storage technology.5 NetApp has teamed up 
with Microsoft Azure to help offer file-based 
storage technology on the public cloud, which allows 
enterprises to run file-based applications in 
Azure. Another example is Palo Alto Networks, 
which not too long ago was a cybersecurity 
company predominantly focused on selling 
on-premise enterprise firewall hardware. Over time, 
the company has expanded its offerings to include 
a wide selection of software-based cloud and 
hybrid-cloud security applications such as threat 
prevention, SaaS security, and cloud network 
protection. As a result, the company’s share of 
software and services revenue has steadily 
increased from approximately 40 percent in 2014 to 
approximately 60 percent in 2018. These cloud-
based offers are viewed as differentiated and 
command higher price-to-sales multiples (typically 
between five and seven times) than traditional 
on-premises hardware offers (which are typically 
between one and a half and three times ).6 During 
this period, Palo Alto Networks’ share price 
5	A storage technology best suited for hosting high-performance computing workloads, enterprise web applications, databases, et cetera.
6	Palo Alto Networks SEC filings, US Securities and Exchange Commission, sec.gov.
IT-infrastructure OEMs have little 
choice but to reinvent their business 
models to increase the share of 
recurring revenue from subscription, 
software, and services. 
4
Hardware’s business-model shift: Finding a new path forward
increased from an average of just over $80 per 
share to approximately $190 per share, an increase 
of about 130 percent, which is about 1.3 times 
the approximately 98 percent increase that the S&P 
500 Information Technology Index experienced in 
that same period.7 (Of course, multiple market 
factors affect share prices, and the percentage of 
recurring software revenue a company generates 
is just one of them.)
Public-cloud and hybrid-cloud product extensions 
often expose the companies offering them to 
competition from software-only players and public-
cloud providers that are increasingly looking 
to offer value-added hybrid-cloud service. In our 
experience, companies that have successfully 
scaled such public-cloud and hybrid-cloud exten­
sions do three things. First, they position the 
cloud offers with their existing customers as an 
extension of their on-premises value proposition in 
the cloud. Second, they design creative buying 
programs that allow buyers to migrate their 
spending seamlessly between on-premises and 
cloud products. That drives a preference for 
the company’s cloud offerings over others as 
customers migrate their workloads to the cloud. 
Finally, they enter partnerships with one or 
more public-cloud providers to tap into a new 
customer segment of cloud-first buyers previously 
not exposed to the company. 
Software-adjacent portfolio expansion 
Another approach adopted by companies to reinvent 
their business models is to expand their portfolio of 
software products. Typically, these expansions 
center on software add-ons that can serve various 
parts of the technology stack. 
Companies that have expanded their portfolio of 
software products have often relied on acquisitions 
of stand-alone software products. For example, 
Cisco has strengthened its presence in networking 
and security by acquiring software companies 
in this space. Since 2017, the company purchased 
three companies: Viptela, which offers SDN in a 
wide-area network (SD-WAN); AppDynamics, 
which offers application-performance management 
and IT-operations analytics; and Duo Security, 
which offers unified-access security and multifactor 
authentication delivered through the cloud. 
Since the acquisitions, Cisco’s price-to-sales 
multiple increased from 3.1 to 3.9.8 
Companies that expand their portfolio in this way 
face the risks of low return on investments, whether 
that’s in-house R&D spending or acquisition costs. 
They also face the risk of improper integration of 
new products with existing hardware-based offers. 
The companies that have made successful portfolio 
moves first start by understanding their target 
decision makers’ typical buying processes. They 
then expand to other products that these decision 
makers either already need or are likely to want 
in the future. Once launched, companies integrate 
these new products with their existing portfolio 
and create packages or bundles that holistically 
address those target customers’ needs. 
Cloud-like subscription-pricing models 
IT buyers desire a seamless purchasing experience 
from their on-premises OEMs that parallels the 
experience they get from their cloud-service 
providers. IT-infrastructure providers can respond 
to these demands with cloud-like subscription-
pricing models for both software and hardware. 
Companies that introduce software products 
(through one of the approaches already discussed) 
often offer the hardware on an up-front-payment 
model while increasing profitability through 
subsequent sales of software on a subscription 
model. For example, since moving to a software-led 
model, Nutanix’s subscription-based billing 
has grown. In the fourth quarter of 2020, about 
65 percent of its billing was subscription-based, 
compared with 31 percent in2017 (when it first 
started reporting subscription-software revenue).9 
7	Palo Alto Networks’ average stock price for 2014 was $82.95 and for 2018 was $215.59; the S&P 500’s Information Technology Index for 2014 
was 630 and for 2018 was 1,210 (Source: S&P Dow Jones Indices, spglobal.com). 
8	Trailing 12 months price-to-sales ratio as of December 31, 2016, and December 31, 2018 (Source: Thomson Reuters, reuters.com).
9	Nutanix investor presentations for first quarter 2019 and first quarter 2018.
5
Hardware’s business-model shift: Finding a new path forward
Even for traditional hardware products, 
IT-infrastructure providers are innovating on pricing 
models by offering hardware with turnkey on-site 
deployment, flexibility to scale on demand, and 
seamless periodic upgrades. Also, they can offer 
customers the option to pay on a per-use or 
consumption model. HPE Greenlake, for instance, 
is a leading example of such a cloud-like subscrip­
tion model for hardware. Another example is 
the data storage provider Pure Storage’s Pure as-a-
Service product, which commits to technical 
outcomes around input/output operations per 
second (IOPS), effective capacity, and uptime 
of 99.999 percent. Pure Storage then delivers and 
installs the appropriate equipment at the 
customer’s premises with additional storage 
media preinstalled to cater to on-demand 
storage needs. 
Almost all major infrastructure providers offer cloud-
like subscription-pricing models for their storage, 
server, and hyperconverged offerings. And cloud-
like subscription-pricing models for hardware 
appliances are gaining adoption among customers. 
Yet these cloud-like recurring-pricing models 
are easier to pull off for high-margin, software-only 
products than for hardware appliances. 
For that reason, cloud-like pricing models for 
hardware appliances are suitable only for certain 
offerings and providers. Companies that launch 
and scale hardware appliances successfully make 
this pricing model’s economics viable by using 
contracting levers such as minimum contract 
commitments or cancellation fees. In the case of 
Pure as-a-Service, Pure Storage requires 
customers to reserve capacity (at a set cost per 
gigabyte) and pay in 12-month installments. 
True-consumption-based pricing is offered only 
for the on-demand add-on capacity. (For more 
on best practices in moving to flexible subscription 
models, see the article “Subscription myth 
busters: What it takes to shift to a recurring-revenue 
model for hardware and software.”) 
The right business model 
will be bespoke
IT-infrastructure providers looking to change their 
business model will likely need to come up with 
their own tailored combination of the models we 
describe here to pivot away from appliance-
based, low-margin, lumpy revenue to sustainable 
recurring-revenue business models. In our 
experience, providers identify the right combination 
by defining their business-model-transformation 
aspirations in one or more of the following ways: 
	
— Increase the percentage of software revenue
	
— Increase the percentage of subscription or 
recurring revenue
	
— Increase the services mix
	
— Improve the customer experience
To succeed at transforming a business 
model, IT-infrastructure OEMs have 
to embrace fully the new organization 
and operating model around it.
6
Hardware’s business-model shift: Finding a new path forward
The right combination of business-model moves to 
achieve these aspirations is company specific 
and needs to be decided based on in-depth research 
into, first, customer demand, buying preferences, 
and life-cycle journeys and, second, company 
opportunities to unlock additional value with premium 
pricing, new upsell and cross-sell pathways, and 
new total-addressable-market unlock.
Regardless of the path chosen to reinvent the new 
business models, successful shifts of this kind 
require transformation across three major areas—
key business functions, economics, and governance.
Pulling it off 
Overhauling a business model requires reinventing 
all core business functions. In our experience, 
changes to six of these functions have a dispropor­
tionate impact on success (Exhibit 2). These include 
the following changes:
	
— Offer design, packaging, and pricing execution. 
Simplify product pricing and packaging.
	
— Sales and marketing. Revamp sales and 
marketing for new business models.
	
— Services, customer success, and renewals. 
Define your North Star for post-purchase 
customer journeys and tailor your go-to-
market strategy.
	
— Operations. Redefine the supply chain 
and invest in capabilities for asset-life-
cycle management.
	
— Systems and IT. Digitize end-to-end 
administration of new offers.
	
— Product and engineering. Restructure products 
and solutions to be software-led and backed by 
customer needs.
Oﬀer design, 
packaging, 
and pricing 
execution
Operations
Sales and 
marketing
Business-
model 
strategy
Services, 
customer 
success, and 
renewals
Product and 
engineering
Systems 
and IT
1. Simplify product pricing and packaging
● Hardware SKUs minimized
● Price value migrated to software
● Subscription-based pricing models 
with technical-outcomes-oriented 
pricing metrics
● Streamlined discounting practices to 
improve price capture
6. Restructure products and solutions to be 
software-led and customer-needs driven
● Integrated solutions across hardware, 
software, and services (vs point solutions)
● Standardized conﬁgurations with 
performance controls embedded 
into intelligent software layers
● Cloud-native, microservices-
enabled architecture for new 
software oﬀerings 
2. Revamp sales and marketing 
for new business models
● Redesigned sales and channel 
incentives for new oﬀers
● New sales and channel 
playbooks and ﬁeld trainings
● Field-sales and channel 
evangelist pods to handhold 
initial ﬁeld execution
5. Digitize end-to-end 
administration of new oﬀers
● Embed product telemetry, 
licensing, metering, and 
monitoring capabilities 
within products 
● Redeﬁne lead-to-cash 
processes with digital channels 
3. Deﬁne North Star for post-purchase 
customer journeys and tailor go to market
● Dedicated customer-success function to 
drive product adoption and use
● Accountability for the customer experience 
across all levels of the organization
4. Redeﬁne supply chain and invest in 
asset-life-cycle management capabilities 
● Design to value for new software-led 
products and oﬀers
● Standardize hardware conﬁgurations 
● Redeﬁne asset-life-cycle practices that 
recycle used assets and optimize the supply 
chain to deliver and recover assets
1
6
3
4
2
5
Exhibit 2
Changes to six core business functions have a disproportionate impact on 
business-model-transformation success.
7
Hardware’s business-model shift: Finding a new path forward
Economics of the transformation 
Business-model transitions result in a radical change 
in revenue, margin, and balance-sheet profiles for 
companies. CFOs constantly fear that these changes 
could destroy market value and internal finance 
risks, such as cash-flow constraints and capital and 
credit risks. Four best practices for managing 
economic risk have emerged so far among hardware 
companies that have undertaken business-
model transformation:
	
— Accelerating the pace of transition of existing 
customers to the new business model to 
minimize the period of uncertainty for them
	
— Creating transparency with investors around 
the business-model transition plan and reporting 
against new business success metrics
	
— Partnering with players along the value chain, 
such as suppliers, distributors, and value-
added resellers, to jointly share and manage 
financial risks 
	
— Exploring inorganic moves to mitigate financial 
risks, such as setting up a separate financing arm, 
or entering joint ventures with a financial 
institution, or undergoing corporate restructuring 
to separate the revenue stream of the new 
business model from that of the old
Governance
To succeed at transforming a business model, 
IT-infrastructure OEMs have to embrace 
fully the new organization and operating model 
around it. The actions required to do so fall 
into four buckets: 
	
— Aligned vision, aspiration, and direction. 
The top team has to be on the same page 
around the aspiration for and ownership of the 
transition and carry out a full communications 
and engagement plan, just as for any 
foundational change.
	
— Agile operating model for execution. It will take 
a central control tower to orchestrate the 
transformation with speed, with cross-functional 
initiatives broken up into a manageable portfolio 
of workstreams. 
	
— Right people, right skills, and right mindsets. 
This level of change means reconsidering 
the talent throughout the organization, to ensure 
the capabilities to run the new business model 
are in place.
	
— Right goals. Cascading objectives and 
key results (OKRs) designed around recurring 
revenue and the customer experience 
will hardwire the change and drive desired 
transformation outcomes.
We believe reinventing the business model for an 
IT-infrastructure OEM is an 18- to 24-month journey 
that requires a total overhaul of a company’s 
approach to doing business. Gleaning lessons from 
similar business-model shifts undertaken by 
software companies, we have seen that it is critical 
for companies to set bold aspirations and timelines 
and commit to the change. Companies that adopt a 
slow and incremental approach to driving change 
often find they’re not able to truly achieve it.
Designed by McKinsey Global Publishing
Copyright © 2021 McKinsey & Company. All rights reserved.
Himanshu Agarwal is a partner in McKinsey’s Silicon Valley office, where Chandra Gnanasambandam is a senior partner and 
Mitra Mahdavian is a partner. Srinath Nagarajan is an associate partner in the San Francisco office.
8
Hardware’s business-model shift: Finding a new path forward
